Many documents (e.g., academic papers) are typically written by multiple
collaborators. While many existing tools support such collaborative
efforts (e.g., dropbox, google docs), these tools lack intelligent
information sharing mechanisms. While capabilities such as ``track
changes'' and ``diff'' visualize changes to authors, they do not
distinguish between minor and major edits and do not consider the
possible effects of edits on other parts of the document. Drawing
collaborators' attention to specific edits and describing them remains
the responsibility of authors. This paper presents our initial work
towards the development of a collaborative system for supporting
multi-author writing. We describe methods for tracking paragraphs,
identifying significant edits and predicting parts of the paper that are
likely to require changes as a result of previous edits. Preliminary
evaluation of the proposed methods shows promising results.

\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

Collaborative writing is a common activity for many people: scientists
write papers and proposals together, lawyers draft contracts,
legislators draft legislation. In recent years, collaborative writing of
documents has become even more widespread with the support of frameworks
that simplify distributed editing (e.g., google docs, dropbox). However,
while document processors provide capabilities such as ``track
changes'', ``diff'' and commenting, they lack intelligent information
sharing mechanisms. They do not attempt to reason about the importance
or relevance of changes to different authors and do not consider how
edits might affect other parts of the document. Therefore, there is
currently significant coordination overhead: authors need to frequently
re-read the entire document or rely on communication from their
co-authors in order to keep track with the current state of the document
and ensure that their edits are mash with other edits.

Because authors need to make sure their edits are coherent with the
document as a whole, including sections written by others, they need to
read the entire document frequently, or rely on updates from their
co-authors. Even when authors communicate with each other frequently,
they can get lost in the volume of edits from other collaborators or
become overwhelmed with too much information.

This paper presents our initial work towards the development of a
collaborative system for assisting multi-author writing by drawing
authors attention to edits that are important and relevant for them, and
pointing out other parts of the document that are likely to require
editing given changes they have just made.

The paper describes methods for tracking paragraphs as they are revised,
for identifying paragraphs that have been significantly changed, and for
predicting which parts of the document are likely to change following a
particular edit. Systems with such capabilities have potential to
improve coherence and coordination while reducing authors' communication
burden. An empirical evaluation of the approach on a corpus of Wikipedia
articles shows promising initial results. Using these methods it is
possible to track paragraph across revisions, identify significant
changes, and predict the paragraphs that are likely to be edited
following a significant edit of a particular paragraph.

\subsection{Related Work}\label{related-work}

Prior work has studied coordination in collaborative writing (e.g.,
~\cite{neuwirth2001computer,kittur2007he}), as well as the social
aspects that arise as a result of edits and comments made by
collaborators~\cite{birnholtz2013write}, and has developed tools for
supporting such collaboration (e.g., Quilt~\cite{fish1988quilt}). Most
closely related to our work are methods and tools for supporting
improved \emph{awareness} of collaborators about changes made to a
document. These include flexible diffing for reporting significant
changes~\cite{neuwirth1992flexible}, methods for categorization of edits
and interfaces for presenting them to
authors~\cite{fong2010did,papadopoulou2007structured,tam2006framework},
methods for detecting and alerting authors about merge
conflicts~\cite{hainsworth2006enabling}, and methods for detecting
structure in text and help co-authors create coherent documents~
\cite{de2007narrative}. Our approach differs from these prior works in
that it leverages natural language processing and data mining methods to
automatically detect significant edits and furthermore predict future
edits, without requiring authors to specify explicitly what changes are
of interest to them. These capabilities go beyond prior approaches for
supporting change awareness in that they can support authors not only in
finding the changes that have been made, but also in drawing their
attention to parts of the document that are likely to require edits as a
result of those changes.

\section{Approach}\label{approach}

This section describes methods for: (1) tracking paragraphs; (2)
identifying significant changes to paragraphs, and (3) predicting future
changes to the article. Capability (1) is required for both monitoring
changes and predicting them. Capability (2) can help promote only the
most important changes and decide whether to alert collaborating authors
of a change. Capability (3) is required in order to draw authors'
attention to other parts of the document that might require changes as a
result of a recent edit. We describe our investigation of the
lightweight use of NLP techniques and history tracking for providing
these important capabilities

\subsection{Tracking paragraphs}\label{tracking-paragraphs}

tracking\textsubscript{v}is\textsubscript{p}aper.png

As a document is being edited, paragraphs can be added, moved or
deleted. To track paragraphs throughout document revisions, we developed
a mapping algorithm that determines which paragraph in the new version
corresponds to each of the paragraphs in the previous version (prior to
editing). The algorithm compares paragraphs based on their Levenshtein
distance, that is, the number of changed characters required to move
from one paragraph to another, including additions, deletions, and
substitutions. We use the Levenshtein edit ratio measure, which is
defined as follows:
\(Levenshtein Ratio(a,b) = 1-\frac{Levenshtein Distance(a,b)}{max(|a|,|b|)} \)

A Levenshtein ratio between two paragraphs close to 1 indicates high
similarity, while a ratio close to 0 indicates the opposite. For each
revision of a document, the algorithm computes the Levenshtein ratio
between each paragraph in the old version and each paragraph in the new
version. Two paragraphs are mapped across the revision if they each have
the highest Levenshtein ratio for the other. If a paragraph in the new
version has no matching paragraphs in the old version (none of its
ratios were above a threshold of 0.4), we label the paragraph as an
addition. If a paragraph in the old version is not matched with any
paragraphs in the next version, then we consider it a deletion.
Figure~{[}fig:mapping{]} illustrates this algorithm: paragraphs 9, 10,
and 12 of the old version were deleted, while the others found clear
matches (e.g., paragraph 11 in the new version was mapped with paragraph
9 in the old version).

\subsection{Identifying Significant
Changes}\label{identifying-significant-changes}

We consider a significant change to be a noticeable change in the
paragraph's topic and content. To detect such changes, we use a topic
modeling approach. Specifically, we use cosine similarity between word
vectors that represent the paragraphs, incorporating Latent Semantic
Indexing~\cite{deerwester1990indexing} (LSI) which accounts for synonyms
and does not penalize for typographical errors. If the cosine similarity
between the new and old versions of a paragraph is below an empirically
determined threshold of 0.8, we consider the edit to be significant.

We chose a topic modeling approach for this task because, in contrast
with the Levenshtein ratio approach used for mapping paragraphs, topic
modeling considers the content of the text. To illustrate, if two of the
paragraph's sentences switch places, the Levenshtein ratio would
decrease despite no meaningful change in content. On the other hand,
changing a couple of key words will slightly lower the Levenshtein
ratio, but could drastically affect the content.

\subsection{Predicting Future Edits}\label{predicting-future-edits}

We hypothesized that a paragraph that underwent a significant change
would cause inconsistencies in related paragraphs, prompting edits.
Therefore, we developed methods for predicting which paragraphs are
likely to change in future revisions as a result of significant edits in
a particular paragraph of the document.

We considered three possible types of inter-paragraph relationships: (1)
\emph{proximity}, that is neighboring paragraphs; (2) \emph{edit
histories}, i.e., paragraphs that tended to be edited together in
previous revisions, and (3) \emph{topic similarity}, i.e., paragraphs
with high cosine similarity. For (2), we labeled pairs as related if
they changed or remained unchanged together over half the time in
previous revisions.

\section{Empirical Evaluation}\label{empirical-evaluation}

This section describes a preliminary evaluation of the proposed methods
for tracking paragraphs, detecting significant edits and predicting
future changes using a corpus of Wikipedia articles and their revision
histories.

\subsection{Data}\label{data}

We used the complete revision histories of 41 different articles chosen
from a diverse set of topics, ranging from famous people and places to
mathematical algorithms to novels. We removed Wikipedia-specific tags
that indicate formatting and other irrelevant data, and eliminated
versions of the articles under 150 characters, as they did not contain
enough information. To focus on revisions that contain some substantial
changes, the versions with simple typo fixes (Levenshtein distance
\(< 15\) ) were eliminated.

\subsection{Findings}\label{findings}

This section describes the findings from our empirical evaluation. Our
main focus was the prediction of future edits, but we also conducted a
manual evaluation of paragraph mapping and significant change detection,
which formed the basis for edit prediction.

\subsubsection{Detecting Significant
Changes}\label{detecting-significant-changes}

Figure~{[}fig:lsi{]} shows the distribution of LSI similarity between
paragraphs in consecutive versions. As can be seen, most edits are
minor, and with the threshold ratio of 0.8 we labeled about 15\% of the
edits as significant.

\includegraphics{figs/lsiRatios1.pdf}\\

We manually evaluated a random sample of a more than 100 such edits to
determine 1) that paragraphs were correctly mapped and 2) that this
method successfully classifies edits. We provide an example of a
significant edit in Figure~{[}fig:pars{]}. While these paragraphs are
clearly the same, the edit is significant because it contributes content
and changes the tone of the paragraph.

\includegraphics{figs/parTopicChange1.pdf}\\

\subsubsection{Predicting Future Edits}\label{predicting-future-edits-1}

We generally found that a significant edit to a paragraph often triggers
edits in other paragraphs in the next revisions. This is shown in
Figure~{[}fig:edits{]}, where each line represents a paragraph that is
edited significantly at time 0 after not being significantly edited in
recent versions, further adjustments (as represented by downward spikes)
are triggered in the near future. We evaluated the three inter-paragraph
relationships (proximity, edit history, and topic similarity) to
determine which paragraphs are more likely to require further editing
after a significant change occurs in the article.

\includegraphics{figs/parChangesNew.pdf}\\

We looked at two measures that indicate that a paragraph may need
attention. The first checked whether the related paragraphs underwent at
least one significant change within the next ten versions. The second
measure tests whether the paragraphs continue to be edited together ten
versions after the significant change, that is whether they change
together (or remain unchanged together) more than half the time. This is
a stronger indication than just undergoing at least one significant
change.

On average, 1.6 pairs of paragraphs related by edit history were found
per revision of the text. A pair related by topic similarity was only
found once every ten versions. Proximity relationships always exist in
each version, as most paragraphs have two neighbors.

With respect to the first measure, the relationship of edit history is
much more predictive of a future significant edit than proximity, as
shown in Table~{[}table:futureEdits{]}. It is also significantly more
predictive than random sample controls. For controls, we compare with
the original paragraph as well as a random sample of any ten consecutive
versions within Wikipedia article histories. For this measure, the
relationship of topic similarity still needs to be evaluated.

{\textbar{}p{5cm}\textbar{}p{5cm}\textbar{}} \textbf{Relationship} \&
\textbf{Percentage of times there exists at least one significant
change}\\Edit History \& 81\%\\

Proximity \& 24\%\\

Paragraph with original change \& 40\%\\

Random sampled paragraph \& 15\%\\

With respect to the second measure, we correctly predicted 71\% of pairs
related by edit history and 63\% of pairs related by topic . (Proximity
was not evaluated for this measure, as it did almost no better than the
random control for the first, less strict, measure.) Further, we
obtained a recall of 80\% for these correct predictions; thus, only 20\%
of the paragraphs that should have been labeled as related (based on
information ten versions in the future) were missed.

\begin{longtable}[c]{@{}llll@{}}
\caption{Ratio of correctly-predicted future linking by
relationship.{}}\tabularnewline
\toprule
\textbf{Relationship} & \textbf{Ratio} & &\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endfirsthead
\toprule
\textbf{Relationship} & \textbf{Ratio} & &\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
Topic Similarity & 63\% & &\tabularnewline
Edit Similarity & 71\% & &\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\section{Discussion and Future Work}\label{discussion-and-future-work}

Our long-term goal is to build a collaborative system that will improve
the collaborative writing process. The methods we developed for tracking
paragraphs throughout document revisions, detecting significant edit and
for predicting future edits, provide the basis for such a system. These
capabilities can inform decisions about alerting authors to specific
changes and places in the document that are likely to require revisions.

In future work, we plan to incorporate information about author identity
to design personalized alerts for authors depending on their context of
editing and history of revisions. For example, the paragraph tracking
algorithm makes it possible to create a list of authors who have
contributed to a specific paragraph, which can be used to determine who
to alert when significant edits occur. We also plan to develop
additional algorithms for summarizing changes and to investigate the use
of algorithms that measure text coherence (e.g.,Textiling
\cite{hearst1994multi}) for alerting authors to portions of the text
that appear to lack coherence. Finally, we plan to explore alternative
ways of presenting to authors the information chosen by the algorithms
as important for them to consider. For example, the system might
highlight changes that it deems relevant or provide a list of them with
links to the places they appear in the text.
